while-loops: Content (#1)
Ada-Developers-Academy/core-unit-1: while-loops/while-loops.md

# While Loops

## Learning Goals

> * Practice using while loops to loop while a conditional is true 
> * Apply a counter variable while using while loops

Author: ```suggestion
* Practice using while loops
* Practice using a counter variable in a while loop
```

## Introduction

Imagine writing software that creates digital group greeting cards. Before the user can sign a digital group greeting card, they need to type in the specific password `AdaLovelaceCodesIt` . If they don't type in the correct password, then the app should ask them to type in the password again, and again, and again, until the user leaves or types in `AdaLovelaceCodesIt` .

How can we solve this problem using Python code?

> for loops allow programmers to iterate over lists. Sometimes, we need to repeat lines of code, but not because we are iterating through a list. We can explore the while loop as an alternative!

Author: ```suggestion
`for` loops allow programmers to iterate over lists. Sometimes, we need to repeat lines of code, but not because we are traversing (iterating through) a list. We can explore the `while` loop as an alternative!
```

Added `for` and `while` formatting -- I will go through these lessons and apply this formatting lesson-wide afterwards

Went with "traversing" as the main verb, and "iterating through" as a parenthetical!

LMK what you think! Closing this suggestion not to stop conversation, but to help me move forward.

> ## Vocabulary and Synonyms

Reviewer: "terminology" and "term" tend to be more often used to refer to words and phrases in the context of a particular field e.g. computer science.

Author: Good thought-- This header is "good enough" and it's in enough lessons (😆 ) that an update to the header should happen curriculum-wide

| Vocab | Definition | Synonyms | How to Use in a Sentence
| --- | --- | --- | ---
Infinite Loop | A loop that runs and never terminates or ends. Leads to a stack overflow error. | endless loop | "The loop kept going and going forever"
Counter variable | A variable solely used to representing a number that increments or decrements. Usually, it's used to count loops. It needs to be initialized outside of the loop. This is an informal, casual label! | - | "The counter variable `i` started at `0` and went up with each loop"

> ## While Loops Syntax

Author: ```suggestion
## `while` Loop Syntax
```

Nah, pretty sure that I typo'd and added that extra "s" there, or at least it reads WAY better not-plural

> While loops are loops that run _while_ some condition is `True` or truthy.

Author: Great point!

Truthiness/falsiness is introduced earlier in the curriculum, but this helps me consider making a callout section/small lesson aside to "recall that truthiness/falsiness is..." and reinforce!

I'll add that content in a separate commit

|--------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `while` | `while` is a keyword in Python that begins a while loop. It looks immediately to the right for a conditional expression, and a `:` to end the line |
| `conditional_evalutes_to_true` | **Replace this** with a conditional expression. When this expression is true, the loop body will run                                               |
| Loop body                      | **Replace this** with the code that should run in this while loop. This should be indented once inside the while loop.                             |

### Practicing Reading While Loops

Here, we use a while loop to print the numbers 1 through 5.

``` python
i = 1
while i <= 5:
    print(f"The value of i is {i}")
    i += 1

print("We are outside the while loop! Wooo!")
```

Here, we have a variable `i` . While `i` is less than or equal to 5, we will print `f"The value of i is {i}"` . Then, we will increment `i` by one.

> `i` begins with a value of `1` . As the while loop loops, `i` grows bigger and bigger, since we're modifying the same `i` variable.

Author: ```suggestion
`i` begins with a value of `1`. As the `while` loop iterates, `i` grows bigger and bigger, since we're modifying the same `i` variable.
```

At some point, `i` will have a value of `6` . Then, `i <= 5` is falsey, and the while loop will exit. Our code execution moves on to the final `print` statement.

Another way to read this while loop is with a table:

| Value of `i` at the beginning of the loop | Is `i <= 10` ? | Value of `i` at the end of the loop body |
|-------------------------------------------|---------------|------------------------------------------|
| `1` | `True` | `2` |
| `2` | `True` | `3` |
| `3` | `True` | `4` |
| `4` | `True` | `5` |
| `5` | `True` | `6` |
| `6` | `False` | Loop body doesn't execute                |

> Here, we should observe that at some point, `i` has a value of `6` , and the code asked "Is 6 <= 5? Is that true?" Because the answer is false, the code skips over the rest of the loop.

Reviewer: > Because the answer is false, the code skips over the rest of the loop.

Consider rewording to "Because the answer is false, the program does not execute the loop body again and exits the loop"

Author: Awesome suggestion-- I super appreciate the catch on consistency between false/no

```suggestion
Here, we should observe that at some point, `i` has a value of `6` , and the code asked "Is 6 <= 5? Is that true?" Because the answer is no, the program does not execute the loop body again and exits the loop.
```

@jkepps I super agree that "Is 6 <= 5? Is that true?" is redundant... Hm... I personally have this opinion that redundant language can be helpful in this situation, really because "Is 6 <= 5?" is literally a small question in size... but is the big question to slow down on. The redundancy imo could help slow down a reader.

(Also, I'm a believer that a newbie would see "Is 6 <= 5?" and answer "yes," but not immediately connect that to "yes has a direct relationship with true." For example, I'd want a programmer to answer "Is 6 <= 5?" with "true" before "yes" :P ..... if that makes sense....)

I think right now I'll keep the redundancy, but I'm happy for pushback if it's muddying the readability.

> Callout: While loops can accidentally run infinitely! If the conditional for the while loop never becomes false, then the while loop and the program keep going, and going, and going... until something forces it to stop (such as a human closing down the program), or our machine cannot run it anymore. We call these cases **infinite loops, ** and are always a bug.

Reviewer: Markdown formatting for bolding isn't working, maybe should be `**infinite loops**,` with the comma outside?

> and are always a bug

Recommend rewording to "and are often a bug".

There are plenty of examples of programs with infinite loops that are not bugs. Event loop based concurrency is often implemented with an explicit `while True:` loop. E.g. https://tutorialedge.net/python/concurrency/asyncio-event-loops-tutorial/

Author: Thank you for the accuracy callout! I totally agree.

```suggestion
Callout: While loops can accidentally run infinitely! If the conditional for the while loop never becomes false, then the while loop and the program keep going, and going, and going... until something forces it to stop (such as a human closing down the program), or our machine cannot run it anymore. We call these cases **infinite loops,** and are often a bug.
```

Fairly confident the formatting mistake was because of the leading space

> ## Used While Problem-Solving

Reviewer: I'm not sure about this header? Maybe "Problem-Solving using `while`"?

Author: Lol i literally don't know what i was intending when i wrote that header

Let's explore different examples that apply while loops.

We can use a while loop even if we are decrementing a variable...

``` python
print("Preparing for blastoff in")

countdown = 10

while countdown > 0:
    print(f"{countdown}...")
    countdown -= 1

print("Launch!")
```

We can use a while loop that uses a function to calculate something...

``` python
flower_basket = []

while len(flower_basket) < 12:
    flower_basket.append("flower")

print("I have a very full flower basket with a dozen flowers:", flower_basket)
```

Callout: Note that this conditional uses `<` , _not_ `<=` , because we don't want to add another flower if the length of `flower_basket` is _equal_ to twelve. Watch out for an off-by-one error!

> We can use a while loop that only checks if a variable is truthy!

Author: This is awesome!

Truthiness/falsiness will be covered earlier, but it definitely needs reinforcement. Hopefully it feels like a reasonable compromise to include both ideas:

```suggestion
We can use a while loop that only checks if a variable is `True` or truthy!
```

Lmk if this doesn't seem like a great compromise

> We can use a while loop that only checks if a variable is truthy!

Reviewer 2: now that i know truthy/falsy are covered earlier, this is great.

``` python
import random
coin_is_tails = True

while coin_is_tails:
    print("The coin flip is tails!")
    print("Will we get heads in the next coin flip?")
    coin_is_tails = bool(random.randint(0, 1))

print("We finally got heads.")
```

### Counter Variables

Let's return to our original example:

``` python
i = 1
while i <= 5:
    print(f"The value of i is {i}")
    i += 1

print("We are outside the while loop! Wooo!")
```

> A variable whose job it is to increment or decrement, specifically in a loop, is often called a _counter variable._

Reviewer: Nit: consider rewording to "A variable that is only incremented or decremented, ...". Saying that a variable _does_ something sounds a little strange.

> This counter variable is:

Reviewer: s/This/A

Author: ```suggestion
A counter variable is:
```

* used in the conditional expression for the while loop
* must eventually be modified in the while loop

> * typically initialized before the loop

Reviewer 2: my python-specific knowledge about variable scope is limited, but shouldn't this say "must be initialized before the loop" if we're specifically talking about counter variables in relation to `while` loops?

In this case, `i` is the counter variable. It gets setup before the while loop begins, and then increments inside the while loop. When we forget to change our counter variable, we often get infinite loops and bugs!

> Callout: An alternative syntax is to use for loops with a range. The for loop syntax sets up and modifies something like a counter variable!

Reviewer: recommend code formatting for "`for` loops" ... "The `for` loop"

Reviewer 2: this should apply to everywhere a keyword is used

Author: I'll do a sweep in this lesson to add formatting, outside of this PR

Thank you!! I was on the fence about how to stylize `while` loops (still figuring out if I want a hyphen...), so this is good feedback.

### `break` and `continue`

`break` is a keyword. When our code comes across `break` in a while loop, it will exit the entire while loop. The next line that runs is the line after the while loop.

``` python
def demonstrate_break():
    i = 3

    while i < 10:
        if i == 7:
            print("i is seven! Let's get out of here!")
            break
        print(f"Counting: i is {i}")
        i += 1

> demonstrate_break()

Reviewer: I'm not sure the wrapper function helps the immediate learning goal since the student may think the function is somehow relevant to the `break` keyword?

Reviewer 2: also, it might be helpful to write out the output of this loop (or maybe save it as an exercise).

Author: Re: the wrapper function:

I'm a little torn on this, since teaching at Ada has given me wisdom that showing example code that lives in functions is often helpful
(going on a weird soapbox about this: not having a wrapper function is totally great, but for some reason, at Ada, I often see that students struggle with the idea that programs are made of functions/methods. By this, I mean that for some of the early projects, many students think that they're code shouldn't live in a method, and should all be in this "script" kind of feeling... which, sure, but ends up being a strange habit to callout around week 5)

I just scrolled up and saw that most of the other examples don't have wrapper functions, so I'll remove it for consistency! But I already typed that lovely paragraph above, so it stays. :P

```

> 

Author: I like the suggestion; I'm going to review this lesson visually before I make a call on adding this. Once I get a good visual on it, I'm going to assess if this output box pushes the lesson over into "this is extremely long and my brain is leaky" territory

One reason why this suggestion is in a medium-pri for me is because intro to `for` loops has them do ~20 loops, often with a loop table, so my hope is that this output is only reinforcement. But I def see the value in this output!

Possible example use cases:

* needing to find a specific element, then leave the iteration
* needing to leave the loop in case it comes across some invalid or error state

> `continue` is a keyword that will stop executing the current iteration, and resume execution at the next iteration. When our code sees `continue` , it doesn't run anymore code in that iteration, but continues to the next loop.

Reviewer: s/anymore/any more

> but continues to the next loop

Recommend rewording to "but continues to the next iteration of the loop".

Making a clear distinction between "loop" as a reference to the overall control structure and "loop iteration" or "iteration of a loop" is helpful I think.

``` python

> def demonstrate_continue():

Reviewer: Same comment as with the other wrapper function.

Consider explicitly stating that "Counting: i is 7" is never printed.

Reviewer 2: another opportunity to use this as exercise: "What is the output of this `while` loop?"

    i = 3

    while i < 10:
        i += 1
        if i == 7:
            print("i is seven!")
            print("Let's print this special message, and then move on")
            print("*~*~*~* \o/ *~*~*~*")
            continue
        print(f"Counting: i is {i}")

demonstrate_continue()
```

Possible example uses cases:

> * wanting a loop to "skip" in a special case

Reviewer 2: maybe be more explicit about what's being "skipped". Not necessarily skipping an entire iteration, but just certain lines of code in that iteration.

Author: ```suggestion
* needing to "skip" the rest of a loop body in a special case
```

## Check for Understanding

<!-- Need to figure out the best, most meaningful way to do a question in Learn -->

<!-- question stubs -->

> Fix this loop so it uses the counter variable `i` , and runs while `i` is less than `5` .
> 
> ``` python
> def loop_until_five():
>     i = 0
> 
>     while False:
>         i += 1
> 
>     return i
> 
> result = loop_until_five()
> ```
> 
> <!-- Answer: i should be 5 -->

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### !challenge

* type: multiple-choice
* id: 378b2b65-9fe1-4d47-b3af-6776bb1db85c
* title: Using Counter Variables

##### !question

Fix this while loop so it uses the counter variable `i` and loops 5 times.

``` python
def loop_until_five():
    i = 0

    while False:
        i += 1

    return i

result = loop_until_five()
```

##### !end-question

##### !options

* while i < 5:
* while i <= 5:
* while i == 5:
* Loop condition doesn't need to be fixed

##### !end-options

##### !answer

* while i <= 5:

##### !end-answer
### !end-challenge

```

> Which of these loop table options most accurately describes this loop?
> 
> ``` python
> i = 0
> result = None
> 
> while i < 5:
>     if (i % 2) == 0:
>         result = True
>     else:
>         result = False
>     i += 1
> ```
> 
> <!-- Answer: This is the correct answer. False answers should toggle True/False on result, or be off-by-one on the i increments -->
> 
> | Value of `i` at the beginning of the loop | `i < 5` ? | `i` at the end of loop body | `result` at end of loop body |
> |-------------------------------------------|----------|-----------------------------|------------------------------|
> | `0` | `True` | `1` | `True` |
> | `1` | `True` | `2` | `False` |
> | `2` | `True` | `3` | `True` |
> | `3` | `True` | `4` | `False` |
> | `4` | `True` | `5` | `True` |
> | `5` | `False` | Loop body doesn't execute   | -                            |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### !challenge

* type: checkbox
* id: f4376535-5a51-4c84-9749-bfe7b9411728
* title: Loop Table

##### !question

Which of these loop table options most accurately describes this loop?

``` python
i = 0
result = None

while i < 5:
    if (i % 2) == 0:
        result = True
    else:
        result = False
    i += 1
```

##### !end-question

##### !options

* 
| Value of `i` at the beginning of the loop | `i < 5` ? | `i` at the end of loop body | `result` at end of loop body |
|-------------------------------------------|----------|-----------------------------|------------------------------|
| `1` | `True` | `1` | `True` |
| `2` | `True` | `2` | `False` |
| `3` | `True` | `3` | `True` |
| `4` | `True` | `4` | `False` |
| `5` | `False` | Loop body doesn't execute   | -                            |

* 
| Value of `i` at the beginning of the loop | `i < 5` ? | `i` at the end of loop body | `result` at end of loop body |
|-------------------------------------------|----------|-----------------------------|------------------------------|
| `1` | `True` | `1` | `True` |
| `2` | `True` | `2` | `False` |
| `3` | `True` | `3` | `True` |
| `4` | `True` | `4` | `False` |
| `5` | `True` | `5` | `True` |
| `6` | `False` | Loop body doesn't execute   | -                            |
* 
| Value of `i` at the beginning of the loop | `i < 5` ? | `i` at the end of loop body | `result` at end of loop body |
|-------------------------------------------|----------|-----------------------------|------------------------------|
| `0` | `True` | `1` | `True` |
| `1` | `True` | `2` | `False` |
| `2` | `True` | `3` | `True` |
| `3` | `True` | `4` | `False` |
| `4` | `True` | `5` | `True` |
| `5` | `False` | Loop body doesn't execute   | -                            |

##### !end-options

##### !answer

* 

| Value of `i` at the beginning of the loop | `i < 5` ? | `i` at the end of loop body | `result` at end of loop body |
|-------------------------------------------|----------|-----------------------------|------------------------------|
| `0` | `True` | `1` | `True` |
| `1` | `True` | `2` | `False` |
| `2` | `True` | `3` | `True` |
| `3` | `True` | `4` | `False` |
| `4` | `True` | `5` | `True` |
| `5` | `False` | Loop body doesn't execute   | -                            |

##### !end-answer

### !end-challenge
```

Reviewer 3: @tildeee Learn doesn't seem to like putting tables as challenge options for me. Is that true for you too? Maybe I'm doing something wrong here.

> Read this code. The function `look_for_treasure` should exit after we find treasure. Add in the `break` keyword in the right line to make this happen and pass the test.
> 
> ``` python
> import random
> 
> def check_if_treasure(item):
>     is_treasure = random.randrange(100) < 25
>     # The line below uses the ternary operator.
>     return "Treasure!" if is_treasure else item + 1
> 
> def look_for_treasure():
>     i = 0
> 
>     while True:
>       if i == "Treasure!":
>         print("We found treasure instead of a number!")
>         print("Let's leave while we can.")
>       print(f"Counting: i is {i}")
>       i = check_if_treasure(i)
> 
> result = look_for_treasure()
> ```
> 
> <!-- Answer: i should be "Treasure" -->

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### !challenge

* type: checkbox
* id: 891a2b93-62bd-4cd6-9b9f-d1be8d7da746
* title: Break keyword

##### !question

Read this code. The function `look_for_treasure` should exit after we find treasure. Select the option that has the `break` keyword in the right line to make this happen.

``` python
import random

def check_if_treasure(item):
    is_treasure = random.randrange(100) < 25
    # The line below uses the ternary operator.
    return "Treasure!" if is_treasure else item + 1

def look_for_treasure():
    i = 0

    while True:
      if i == "Treasure!":
        print("We found treasure instead of a number!")
        print("Let's leave while we can.")
      print(f"Counting: i is {i}")
      i = check_if_treasure(i)

result = look_for_treasure()
```

##### !end-question

##### !options

* 
```python
def check_if_treasure(item):
    is_treasure = random.randrange(100) < 25
    # The line below uses the ternary operator.
    return "Treasure!" if is_treasure else item + 1

def look_for_treasure():
    i = 0

    while True:
      if i == "Treasure!":
        print("We found treasure instead of a number!")
        print("Let's leave while we can.")
        break
      print(f"Counting: i is {i}")
      i = check_if_treasure(i)

result = look_for_treasure()
```

* 
```python
def check_if_treasure(item):
    is_treasure = random.randrange(100) < 25
    # The line below uses the ternary operator.
    return "Treasure!" if is_treasure else item + 1

def look_for_treasure():
    i = 0

    while True:
      if i == "Treasure!":
        print("We found treasure instead of a number!")
        print("Let's leave while we can.")
      print(f"Counting: i is {i}")
      break
      i = check_if_treasure(i)

result = look_for_treasure()
```

*
```python
def check_if_treasure(item):
    is_treasure = random.randrange(100) < 25
    # The line below uses the ternary operator.
    return "Treasure!" if is_treasure else item + 1

def look_for_treasure():
    i = 0

    while True:
      if i == "Treasure!":
        print("We found treasure instead of a number!")
        print("Let's leave while we can.")
      print(f"Counting: i is {i}")
      
      i = check_if_treasure(i)
      break

result = look_for_treasure()
```

##### !end-options

##### !answer

* 
```python
def check_if_treasure(item):
    is_treasure = random.randrange(100) < 25
    # The line below uses the ternary operator.
    return "Treasure!" if is_treasure else item + 1

def look_for_treasure():
    i = 0

    while True:
      if i == "Treasure!":
        print("We found treasure instead of a number!")
        print("Let's leave while we can.")
        break
      print(f"Counting: i is {i}")
      i = check_if_treasure(i)

result = look_for_treasure()
```

##### !end-answer

### !end-challenge

```

Reviewer 3: I also might think this question would be better as part of an activity?

    i += 1

print("We are outside the while loop! Wooo!")
```

Here, we have a variable `i` . While `i` is less than or equal to 5, we will print `f"The value of i is {i}"` and then increment `i` by one.

`i` begins with a value of `1`. As the `while` loop iterates, `i` grows bigger and bigger, since we're modifying the same `i` variable.

At some point, `i` will have a value of `6` . The conditional, `i <= 5`, will evaluate to `False`  and the while loop will exit. Our code execution moves on to the final `print` statement.

Another way to read this while loop is with a table:

| Value of `i` at the beginning of the loop iteration | Is `i <= 5` ? | Value of `i` at the end of the loop body |
|-------------------------------------------|---------------|------------------------------------------|
| `1` | `True` | `2` |
| `2` | `True` | `3` |
| `3` | `True` | `4` |
| `4` | `True` | `5` |
| `5` | `True` | `6` |
| `6` | `False` | Loop body doesn't execute                |

Here, we should observe that at some point, `i` has a value of `6` , and the code asked "Is 6 <= 5? Is that true?" Because the answer is no, the program does not execute the loop body again and exits the loop.

> Callout: While loops can accidentally run infinitely! If the conditional for the while loop never becomes false, then the while loop and the program keep going, and going, and going... until something forces it to stop (such as a human closing down the program), or our machine cannot run it anymore. We call these cases **infinite loops,** and are often a bug.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
### !callout-danger

## Infinite Loops
While loops can accidentally run infinitely! If the conditional for the while loop never becomes false, then the while loop and the program keep going, and going, and going... until something forces it to stop (such as a human closing down the program), or our machine cannot run it anymore. We call these cases **infinite loops,** and are often a bug.
### !end-callout
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

```
